.\" mlterm.1   -*- nroff -*-
.TH MLTERM 1 "2018-10-27"
.SH NAME
mlterm \- Multi Lingual TERMinal emulator on X
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mlterm
.RB [\fIoptions\fP]
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmlterm\fP is a multi-lingual terminal emulator written from
scratch, which supports various character sets and encodings
in the world and complex characters such as double width for East
Asian, combining for Thai, Vietnamese, and so on, and bi-direction for
Arabic and Hebrew.  Indic scripts are experimentally supported.
It also supports various unique feature such
as anti-alias using FreeType, multiple XIM, multiple windows,
scrollbar API, scroll by mouse wheel, automatic selection of
encoding, daemon mode, and so on.
.PP
Supported encodings are:
ISO-8859-[1-11], ISO-8859-[13-16], TIS-620 (same as ISO-8859-11), KOI8-R,
KOI8-U, KOI8-T, GEORGIAN-PS, TCVN5712, ISCII_(ASSAMESE|BENGALI|GUJARATI|
HINDI|KANNADA|MALAYALAM|ORIYA|PUNJABI|TAMIL|TELUGU), VISCII, CP125[0-8],
CP874, EUC-JP, EUC-JISX0213, Shift_JIS, Shift_JISX0213,
ISO-2022-JP[1-3], EUC-KR, UHC, JOHAB, ISO-2022-KR, GB2312 (EUC-CN), GBK,
GB18030, ISO-2022-CN, HZ, EUC-TW, BIG5, BIG5HKSCS, and UTF-8.
If you have already set locale (for example LANG variable;
see \fBlocale\fR(7) for detail) \fBmlterm\fR will automatically select
proper encoding.
.PP
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH OPTIONS
Note that \fIbool\fR is to be substituted by \fBtrue\fR or \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-aa\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use anti-aliased fonts. This option works only with Xft or cairo for now.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-sbbg\fR=\fIcolor\fR
Specify a background color of a scrollbar.
A valid value for \fIcolor\fR is a color name or a RGB value.
The color name should be defined in rgb.txt or "\fBcolor\fR" configuration file.
The RGB value's format should be "#RRGGBB", "#RRGGBBAA", "rgb:RR/GG/BB" or "rgba:RR/GG/BB/AA".
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-ctl\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable complex text layouting on UTF8 encoding to support indic scripts and
RTL (right-to-left) languages such as Arabic and Hebrew.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-\-km\fR=\fIencoding\fR
Specify encoding.
Valid encodings are listed in \fBDESCRIPTION\fR section
above in this man page.
\fBAUTO\fR makes mlterm determine the according according to
the current locale (default \fBAUTO\fR).
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-sbfg\fR=\fIcolor\fR
Specify a foreground color of a scrollbar.
See \fB\-\-sbbg\fR option for valid values.
.TP
\fB\-G\fR, \fB\-\-vertical=\fImode\fR
Specify vertical writing mode.
\fBcjk\fR for RTL vertical writing and \fBmongol\fR for LTR one.
The default is \fBnone\fR which means horizontal writing mode.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-bright=\fIvalue\fR
Brightness of background images in percent.
See \fB\-p\fR option for details of background images.
The default is \fB100\fR (keep original).
.TP
\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-icon\fR=\fIname\fR
Specify a name to be used when a mlterm window is iconified.
The default is "\fBmlterm\fR".
.TP
\fB\-J\fR, \fB\-\-dyncomb\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable dynamic character combining.
"Dynamic" means that combining characters are stored in
without combining but they are displayed using combined form.
This affects calculation of column position,
i.e., a pair of base character and combining character
is counted to be two columns in this mode, while it is counted
to be one column in the normal mode.  Under this option,
a (logical) column number and a character one-to-one correspondence.
even for combining characters (though not for fullwidth characters;
see \fB\-Z\fR/\fB\-\-multicol\fR option for handling of fullwidth characters).
Thus, this mode enables you to use combining characters with
software which does not support combining characters.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-K\fR, \fB\-\-metakey\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify a key to be interpreted as a META key.
Valid \fIvalue\fRs are: \fBalt\fR, \fBmeta\fR, \fBhyper\fR,
\fBsuper\fR, \fBmod1\fR, \fBmod2\fR, \fBmod3\fR, \fBmod4\fR,
and \fBnone\fR.   The default is \fBnone\fR.

See \fB\-k\fR option also.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-ls\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to use login shell or not.  The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-im\fR= \fIinput method\fR : \fB[\fR\fI arguments\fR \fB... ]\fR
Specify an input method. (See doc/ja/README.ja in detail)
.PP
.RS
.B Examples:
.TP
\-\-im=xim
Use XIM with the default XIM server specified by standard way (i.e.,
\fBXMODIFIERS\fR environmental variable).
.TP
\-\-im=xim:Ami
Use XIM with Ami on the system locale.
.TP
\-\-im=xim:kinput2:ja_JP.EUC-JP
Use XIM with kinput2 on ja_JP.EUC-JP locale.
.TP
\-\-im=kbd:arabic
Use keyboard mapping input method in Arabic.
.TP
\-\-im=kbd:hebrew
Use keyboard mapping input method in Hebrew.
.TP
\-\-im=kbd:isciixxx
Use keyboard mapping input method in Indic.
.TP
\-\-im=uim
Use uim with the default conversion engine.
.TP
\-\-im=uim:prime
Use uim with prime conversion engine.
.TP
\-\-im=m17nlib:ru
Use m17n library in Russian.
.TP
\-\-im=m17nlib:or:itrans
Use m17n library in Oriya using ITRANS method.
.TP
\-\-im=scim
Use SCIM.
.TP
\-\-im=ibus
Use IBus with the default conversion engine.
.TP
\-\-im=ibus:anthy
Use IBus with anthy conversion engine.
.TP
\-\-im=fcitx
Use Fcitx.
.TP
\-\-im=canna
Use Canna.
.TP
\-\-im=wnn
Use Freewnn.
.TP
\-\-im=wnn:foo.bar
Use Freewnn with jserver at foo.bar host.
(JSERVER environmental variable is also available.)
.TP
\-\-im=skk
Use SKK.
.TP
\-\-im=skk:dict=foo.bar:utf8,sskey=\\x3b
Use SKK with the use of utf8 skk server at foo.bar host and semicolon key as sticky shift key.
(SKK_DICTIONARY and SKK_STICKY_SHIFT_KEY environmental variable are also available.)
.TP
\-\-im=iiimf
Use IIIMF in the system language.
.TP
\-\-im=iiimf:ar
Use IIIMF in Arabic.
.TP
\-\-im=iiimf:ja:CannaLE
Use IIIMF in Japanese using CannaLE language engine.
.TP
.TP
\-\-im=none
Don't use input method.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-name\fR=\fIname\fR
Specify application name.
The default is "\fBmlterm\fR".
.TP
\fB\-O\fR, \fB\-\-sbmod\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the side to show a scrollbar.
\fBleft\fR for left side and \fBright\fR for right side.
\fBnone\fR turns off a scrollbar.
\fBautohide\fR shows a scrollbar only if mouse pointer is
at the right edge of the screen.
The default is \fBleft\fR.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-clip\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to enable CLIPBOARD (not only PRIMARY) selection.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-Q\fR, \fB\-\-vcur\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Change interpretation of cursor keys to be natural
in vertical writing mode.
This means that up and down arrow keys are treated as
backward (left arrow in horizontal LTR) and forward
(right arrow in horizontal LTR), respectively.
In \fBcjk\fR \fB\-G\fR/\fB\-\-vertical\fR mode,
left and right arrow keys are also treated as next line
(down arrow in horizontal LTR) and previous line
(up arrow in horizontal LTR), respectively, while
vice versa in \fBmongol\fR mode.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-fsrange\fR=\fIrange\fR
Set acceptable range of font size.
The format is "\fIminsize\fR-\fImaxsize\fR", where \fIminsize\fR and
\fImaxsize\fR are font sizes in pixel (default \fB6-30\fR).
The GUI configurator and other means for setting fontsize should honor
the range.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-sbview\fR=\fIname\fR
Select a type of scrollbar.  See \fBSCROLLBAR\fR section below
for details.  The default is "\fBsimple\fR" which means the
built-in simple scrollbar.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-title\fR=\fIname\fR
Specify a title for a mlterm window.
The default is "\fBmlterm\fR".
.TP
\fB\-U\fR, \fB\-\-viaucs\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Force to convert a selection (i.e., copy-and-paste strings) whose
type is not UTF8_STRING to the current mlterm encoding via Unicode.
See \fBSELECTION\fR section below for detail.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-varwidth\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use variable column width.  You may want to use this
option when you use proportional fonts.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-W\fR, \fB\-\-sep\fR=\fIcharacterlist\fR
Delimiter characters used for word selection, which are
consulted when you double-clicked mlterm, to define what
is a word.
The default is "\fB ,.:;/|@()[]{}\fR")
.TP
\fB\-X\fR, \fB\-\-alpha\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Alpha in pseudo or true transparent.
The default is \fB255\fR.
.TP
\fB\-Y\fR, \fB\-\-decsp\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use dynamically composed line drawing character set
of DEC special.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
This overrides DEC_SPECIAL in "font" configuration file,
while DEC_SPECIAL in "aafont" (for Xft or cairo) is always
overridden.
.TP
\fB\-Z\fR, \fB\-\-multicol\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Treat fullwidth characters (east Asian characters in most cases;
which occupies two columns on the screen) as they occupy two logical
columns.  It is the de-facto standard way to handle
fullwidth characters in east Asian terminal emulators
(XFree86 xterm and  kterm, cxterm, hanterm, rxvt, eterm)
and other systems such as MS\-DOS, PC\-9801, and so on.
In most fonts, the glyphs of fullwidth characters are designed
assuming that their width are twice of normal characters and
won't display correctly without this option.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-0\fR, \fB\-\-crbg\fR=\fIcolor\fR
Specify background color for cursor (default is same to foreground color).
Valid values for \fIcolor\fR are color names defined in rgb.txt and
color rgb string whose format is "#RRGGBB", "#RRGGBBAA",
"rgb:RR/GG/BB" or "rgba:RR/GG/BB/AA".
.TP
\fB\-1\fR, \fB\-\-wscr\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify actual window width, by percentage against
calculated value by multiplying font width by column number.
This is useful when you use a proportional font which includes
some glyphs with exceptionally large width, i.e., much
larger "maximum width" than your expectation.
In vertical mode this option changes actual window height.
The default is \fB100\fR.
.TP
\fB\-3\fR, \fB\-\-contrast\fR=\fIvalue\fR)
Contrast of background image in percent.
See \fB\-p\fR option for details of background image.
The default is \fB100\fR.
.TP
\fB\-4\fR, \fB\-\-gamma\fR=\fIvalue\fR)
Gamma of background image in percent.
See \fB\-p\fR option for details of background image.
The default is \fB100\fR.
.TP
\fB\-5\fR, \fB\-\-big5bug\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable a workaround for Big5 CTEXT bugs (which had been existed until XFree86 4.1.0).
This affects Big5 selections (i.e., copy-and-paste strings) in
COMPOUND_TEXT format which \fBmlterm\fR sends.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-6\fR, \fB\-\-stbs\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Don't exit backscroll mode when console applications output something.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-7\fR, \fB\-\-bel\fR=\fImode\fR
Behavior when BEL (0x07) is received. \fBsound\fR for beep
, \fBvisual\fR for blanking screen and \fBsound|visual\fR for the both.
The default is \fBnone\fR which ignores BEL.
.TP
\fB\-8\fR, \fB\-\-88591\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use ISO8859-1 fonts for US-ASCII part of various encodings.
.TP
\fB\-9\fR, \fB\-\-crfg\fR=\fIcolor\fR
Specify foreground color for cursor (default is same to background color).
Valid values for \fIcolor\fR are color names defined in rgb.txt and
color rgb string whose format is "#RRGGBB", "#RRGGBBAA",
"rgb:RR/GG/BB" or "rgba:RR/GG/BB/AA".
.TP
\fB\-$\fR, \fB\-\-mc\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Doubleclick/tripleclick interval in millisecond.
The default is \fB250\fR.
.TP
\fB\-%\fR, \fB\-\-logseq\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable logging. Contents of stream received by mlterm will be logged under
~/.mlterm/.
This option is mainly intended to be used for debugging purposes.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
Note that \fB%\fR should be escaped to be supplied as a command line option on
most shells.
.TP
\fB\-&\fR, \fB\-\-borderless\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Asks the window manager to use no decorations at all. Warning: You will
not be able to resize the window. You probably want to use \fB\-\-geometry\fR
as well.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-@\fR, \fB\-\-screens\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify number of screens (sessions) to be used in start up.
The default is \fB1\fR.
Note that when one of these screens are closed, sessions which
were connected to the screens do not immediately killed.

See \fBMULTIPLE PTY\fR section for details.
.TP
\fB\-*\fR, \fB\-\-type\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the rendering engine to be used to draw fonts.
\fBxcore\fR is conventional X11 core font mechanism.
\fBxft\fR means Xft mechanism and \fBcairo\fR means cairo mechanism.
The default is \fBcairo\fR.
.TP
\fB\-#\fR, \fB\-\-initstr\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify a string to be automatically sent after initialization of session.
The \fBvalue\fR normally will be parsed by a shell.
See \fB\-e\fR option to execute other application at start-up time.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-ac\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify number of columns to be occupied by a Unicode's
"EastAsianAmbiguous" character.  The default is \fB1\fR except "ja" locale
where the default is \fB2\fR. Some of asian people may want to specify \fB2\fR.
See Unicode Standard Annex (UAX) #11
East Asian Width found at Unicode web site for details.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bg\fR=\fIcolor\fR
Specify background color (default \fBwhite\fR).
Valid values for \fIcolor\fR are color names defined in rgb.txt and
color rgb string whose format is "#RRGGBB", "#RRGGBBAA",
"rgb:RR/GG/BB" or "rgba:RR/GG/BB/AA".
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-cp932\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use CP932 mapping table to convert from JIS X 0208 to Unicode
when displaying JIS X 0208 characters using Unicode font in
Xft or cairo mode.  This is useful when you use proprietary
Japanese true type fonts which are intended to be used with Microsoft
Windows, with \fBmlterm\fR with encodings (such as EUC-JP,
Shift_JIS, ISO-2022-JP, and so on) which contain JIS X 0208 as
a coded character set.

The reason is, such proprietary fonts may have glyphs only for
Unicode code points into which JIS X 0208 code points are converted using
CP932 mapping table.  (CP932 is a name of mapping table which is
used by Microsoft to convert from Shift_JIS [plus Microsoft private
extended characters] into Unicode.  In Unicode's point of view,
CP932 is a name of encoding which is similar to Shift_JIS and
is used by Japanese version of Microsoft Windows.)
If you use such fonts for
encodings such as EUC-JP and Shift_JIS with JIS0208.TXT mapping
table which \fBmlterm\fR adopts as the standard, a few characters
are mapped into Unicode code points where the fonts don't have glyphs.

Both of CP932.TXT and JIS0208.TXT mapping tables are supplied
by Unicode Consortium, though they are regarded to be obsolete.

The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-display\fR=\fIstring\fR
Specify X display to connect with.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR \fIprogram\fR \fB[\fR \fIarguments\fR \fB... ]\fR
Invoke the command in the \fBmlterm\fR window.  This option
must be the last option on the command line.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-fg\fR=\fIcolor\fR
Foreground color (default \fBblack\fR).
Valid values for \fIcolor\fR are color names defined in rgb.txt and
color rgb string whose format is "#RRGGBB", "#RRGGBBAA",
"rgb:RR/GG/BB" or "rgba:RR/GG/BB/AA".
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-geometry\fR=\fIgeometry\fR
Specify size and position of the window; see \fBX\fR(7).
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Show help messages.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-xim\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to use XIM (X Input Method).  Most east Asian
people will want to enable this option.  Other people can also
safely enable this.  The default is \fBtrue\fR.
The name of the XIM server to be connected is specified by
standard way (i.e., \fBXMODIFIERS\fR environmental variable).
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Start as a daemon process. Note that mlclient is executed if a daemon process
has already started.
Possible \fR=\fIvalue\fRs are "blend" and "genuine".
See the chapter of \fBDAEMON MODE\fR for details.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-meta\fR=\fImode\fR
Behavior of META key.  \fBesc\fR for sending ESC
and \fBnone\fR for ignoring META key.
The default is \fB8bit\fR which sets the most significant bit.

See \fB\-K\fR option also.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-sl\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify number of lines of backlog or "unlimited".
Over 65535(0xffff) is regarded as "unlimited".
The default is \fB128\fR.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-comb\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable combining characters by overstriking glyphs (recommended
for TIS-620, TCVN5712, and UTF-8).
Note that fonts which contain combining characters which extend
backward cannot be used, since \fBmlterm\fR does combine characters
by controlling the writing positions.
This option is automatically turned on when using \fB\-\-dyncomb\fR option.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-noucsfont\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use non-Unicode fonts even when \fBmlterm\fR encoding is UTF-8.
Useful when you don't have ISO10646-1 fonts and you want to use
UTF-8 encoding.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-lsp\fR(=\fIvalue\fR)
Specify number of extra pixels between lines.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-pic\fR=\fIpath\fR
Path for a wallpaper (background) image.
Note that the wallpaper cannot be used with pseudo transparent background.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-extkey\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable extended keys for backscroll mode.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
Extended scroll keys are
\fBSCROLL_UP\fR, up arrow, and "k" (for scrolling one line backward) and
\fBSCROLL_DOWN\fR, down arrow, and "j" (for scrolling one line forward).
Please note that concrete keys for symbols of
\fBSCROLL_UP\fR and \fBSCROLL_DOWN\fR are specified in
\fBkey\fR configuration file.
Only keys of \fBPAGE_UP\fR and \fBPAGE_DOWN\fR (which are
specified in \fBkey\fR configuration file)
are available by default.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-fade\fR=\fIratio\fR
Specify fading ratio for unfocused windows.
\fB100\fR means no fading and \fB0\fR means darkest.
The default is \fB100\fR
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-mdi\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to use multiple document interface.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
If you disable this option, scrollbar and screen separation are unavailable.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transbg\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to enable pseudo transparent background.
Note that pseudo transparent background cannot be used with wallpaper.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-onlyucsfont\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use Unicode fonts even when \fBmlterm\fR encoding is not UTF-8.
Useful when you have ISO10646 fonts but you don't have other fonts
and want to use non-UTF-8 encodings.
Note that conversion to Unicode is lossy.
i.e. if \fBmlterm\fR encoding is not a subset of Unicode
like ISO-2022-JP-2 or EUC-TW, characters which are regarded as
a same character in Unicode will be displayed with the same glyph and
cannot be distinguished.

The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version
Show version information.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-fontsize\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify font size in pixel.  The default is \fB16\fR.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-tw\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify tab width.  The default is \fB8\fR.
.TP
\fB\-y\fR, \fB\-\-term\fR=\fIstring\fR
Specify terminal type, i.e., the value of \fBTERM\fR variable.
The default is \fBxterm\fR.
.TP
\fB\-z\fR, \fB\-\-largesmall\fR=\fIsize\fR
Specify the step of changing font size in pixel when you pushed
"Font size larger" or "Font size smaller" button on
GUI configurator.
The default is \fB1\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-aafont\fR=(\fIbool\fR) (Available for mlterm-fb or mlterm-wl)
Whether to use ~/.mlterm/*aafont configurations with the use of fontconfig.
The default is \fBfalse\fR for mlterm-fb and \fBtrue\fR for mlterm-wl.
.TP
\fB\-\-ade\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify character encodings detected automatically.
.TP
\fB\-\-auto\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Automatically detect appropriate character encoding from the encodings
specified by \-\-ade option. The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-altbuf\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to enable alternate screen buffer.
This option is similar to "titeInhibit" of xterm.
.TP
\fB\-\-bc\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to broadcast input or pasted characters to all ptys whose value of
"ignore_broadcasted_chars" option is false.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-bd\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the color to use to display bold characters.
.TP
\fB\-\-bdfont\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use bold font for characters with the bold attribute.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-bimode\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify bidi mode. Valid values are: \fBnormal\fR, \fBleft\fR and \fBright\fR.
The default is \fBnormal\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-bisep\fR=\fIcharacterlist\fR
Specify separator characters to render bidi text.
.TP
\fB\-\-bl\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the color to use to display blinking characters.
.TP
\fB\-\-blink\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Blink cursor. The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-blpos\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the position (offset from the default baseline) of baseline.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-border\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify inner border width. The default is \fB2\fR.
The maximum value is \fB224\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-boxdraw\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Use either unicode font or DEC Special font forcibly to draw box-drawing characters.
\fBunicode\fR for unicode font and \fBdecsp\fR for DEC special font.
The default is \fBnoconv\fR which draw them as they are.
.TP
\fB\-\-ciphlist\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify ciphers (comma separated list) for encrypting the ssh session.
.TP
\fB\-\-ckm\fR=\fIencoding\fR (Available for mlterm-con)
Specify encoding of the console where mlterm-con works.
Valid encodings are listed in \fBDESCRIPTION\fR section
above in this man page.
\fBAUTO\fR makes mlterm determine the according according to
the current locale (default \fBAUTO\fR).
.TP
\fB\-\-co\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the color to use to display crossed-out characters.
.TP
\fB\-\-colors\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to recognize ANSI color change escape sequences.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-csc\fR=\fIvalue\fR (Available for mlterm-con)
Specify the number of sixel graphics colors of the console where mlterm-con works.
A valid value is 16, 256 or full. The default is \fB16\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-csp\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify number of extra pixels between lines. (ignored if you specify \fB\-\-V\fR option.)
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-csz\fR=\fIvalue\fR (Available for mlterm-con)
Specify cell width and height in pixel which mlterm-con uses if it doesn't get them.
The default is \fB8,16\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-da1\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify primary device attributes string.
The default is \fB63;1;2;3;4;7;29\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-da2\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify secondary device attributes string.
The default is \fB24;279;0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-depth\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify visual depth. (8,16,24,32)
If depth is 32, you can enable semi-transparency by specifying
opacity as the value of \-\-alpha option or "rgba:RR/GG/BB/AA"
as the value of \-\-bg option.
.TP
\fB\-\-deffont\fR=\fIvalue\fR
DEFAULT in ~/.mlterm/*font.
.TP
\fB\-\-emoji\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify path of a directory where emoji image files exist or a open type emoji
font to show unicode emoji characters.
The default is \fB~/.mlterm/emoji\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-exitbs\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to exit backscroll mode on receiving data from pty.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-fullwidth\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Force full width regardless of EastAsianWidth.txt.

e.g.) --fullwidth=U+1234-5678,U+0123-4567
.TP
\fB\-\-halfwidth\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Force half width regardless of EastAsianWidth.txt.

e.g.) --halfwidth=U+1234-5678,U+0123-4567
.TP
\fB\-\-ibc\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to ignore broadcasted characters.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-iconpath\fR=\fIpath\fR
Specify the file to be used as a window icon.
.TP
\fB\-\-it\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the color to use to display italic characters.
.TP
\fB\-\-itfont\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Use italic font for characters with the italic attribute.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-keepalive\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify interval seconds to send keepalive message to ssh server.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-lborder\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify inner border width of a layout manager. The default is \fB0\fR.
The maximum value is \fB224\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-ldd\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Embold glyphs by drawing doubly at 1 pixel leftward instead of rightward.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-locale\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify locale.
The default is \fB""\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-logmsg\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable logging messages of mlterm to ~/.mlterm/msg.log.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-loecho\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to use local echo mode or not. The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-maxptys\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify maximum number of ptys (sessions) to be opened simultaneously.
It should be multiple of 32.
The default is \fB32\fR.

See \fBMULTIPLE PTY\fR section for detail.
.TP
\fB\-\-metaprefix\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify prefix characters in pressing meta key if mod_meta_mode = esc.
The default is \fB\\x1b\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-multivram\fR(=\fIbool\fR) (Available for mlterm-fb on NetBSD/x68k)
Whether to draw the wall picture on Text VRAM instead of Graphic VRAM to improve
the performance of scrolling.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-noul\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Don't draw underline.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-oft\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify features of glyph substitution.
The default is \fBfliga,clig,dlig,hlig,rlig\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-osc52\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Allow access to clipboard(selection) by OSC 52 sequence.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-ost\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify script of glyph substitution.
The default is \fBflatn\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-otl\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to show substituting glyphs in open type fonts with the use of libotf or harfbuzz.
Don't specify \-\-ctl=false if you want to use substituting glyphs.
\-\-ctl option disables automatic search of alternative glyphs in other fonts on cairo/xlib
and freetype+fontconfig/{wayland|framebuffer}.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-parent\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify parent Window ID.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-point\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Treat the value of \-w option as point instead of pixel.
Note that this option works on xft, cairo or win32.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-pubkey\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify public key file for ssh connection.
The default is \fB~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub\fR(\fB%HOMEPATH%\mlterm\id_rsa.pub\fR in win32).
.TP
\fB\-\-privkey\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify private key file for ssh connection.
The default is \fB~/.ssh/id_rsa\fR(\fB%HOMEPATH%\mlterm\id_rsa\fR in win32).
.TP
\fB\-\-rcn\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Reconnect to ssh server automatically in unexpected disconnection.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-restart\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Whether to restart mlterm with all opened ptys except ssh if SIGSEGV, SIGBUS, SIGFPE
or SIGILL is received.
The default is \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-rv\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the color to use to display reverse characters.
.TP
\fB\-\-scp\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Allow OSC 5379 scp.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
Even if allow_scp = false, it is possible to transfer a file to "." directory
(~/.mlterm/scp).
.TP
\fB\-\-seqfmt\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the format of logging vt100 sequence. \fBraw\fR for logging as it is
and \fBttyrec\fR for logging by ttyrec format.
The default is \fBraw\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-serv\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify a host you want to connect via ssh etc.
This option is enabled only if mlterm is built with MinGW or \-\-enable\-ssh2 option.

Value format: (<protocol>://)(<user>@)<server>(:<port>)(:<encoding>)

e.g.) mlterm \-\-serv ssh://user@host:22:eucjp
.TP
\fB\-\-shortcut\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to allow dynamic change of shortcut keys by OSC 5379 set_shortcut sequence.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-slp\fR(=\fIbool\fR) (Available for Android)
Whether to start mlterm with local pty instead of ssh connection.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-trim\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Whether to trim new line characters at the end in pasting text.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-ul\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the color to use to display underlined characters.
.TP
\fB\-\-ulpos\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Specify the position (offset from the baseline) of underline.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-ucsnoconv\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Use unicode fonts partially regardless of -n option.

e.g.) --ucsnoconv=U+1234-5678,U+0123-4567
.TP
\fB\-\-urgent\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Draw the user's attention when making a bell sound in the unfocused window.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-uriword\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Select URI by double clicking it regardless of \fB\-W\fR option.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-vtcolor\fR=\fImode\fR
Set vt color mode. \fB256\fR for pseudo color, \fBhigh\fR for high color and
\fBtrue\fR for true color.
The default is \fBhigh\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-working\-directory\fR=\fIvalue\fR
Working directory.
.TP
\fB\-\-x11\fR(=\fIbool\fR)
Enable x11 forwarding for ssh connection.
The default is \fBfalse\fR.

.\" ********************************************************************
.SH GUI CONFIGURATOR
Pushing control key and mouse button 3 invokes GUI configurator
(\fBmlconfig\fR).  It can modify encoding, foreground and background
color, tab size, backlog size, font size, usage of combining character,
and so on.
.PP
GUI configurator has six pages (Encoding, Font, Background, Color,
Scrollbar, and Others), OK/Apply/Cancel buttons, and
four special buttons.
.PP
Note this feature needs GTK+ 2.x or later.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Encoding page
Encoding-related configurations are located in this page.
Note that configurations will be enabled when you push Apply button.
.TP
Encoding
Specify encoding.  (\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-\-km\fR)
.TP
Auto detect
Whether to detect appropriate character encoding automatically. (\fB\-\-auto\fR)
.TP
Encoding list
Specify character encodings detected automatically. (\fB\-\-ade\fR)
.TP
Input Method
Specify which input method to be used. (\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-im\fR)
.PP
.RS
.B XIM:
.TP
XIM Server
Specify the name of XIM server to be connected.  You can input
from your keyboard or you can choose one of registered XIM servers.
This doesn't have equivalent command option.
See the section of \fBXIM Configuration File\fR for registration of
XIM servers.
.TP
XIM locale
Specify the name of the locale to be used for connection to
the XIM server.  Popular XIM servers usually have acceptable
locales to be used for connection.  If you choose registered
XIM server in \fBInput Method\fR, this will be set automatically.
You can also input the locale name from your keyboard.
.PP
.B keyboard:
.TP
Option
Specify the name of key mapping table. When using ISCII encoding, Indic key
mapping is used automatically. In other encodings, this will be automatically
selected according to the current locale.
.PP
.B uim:
.TP
Option
Specify the name of the conversion engine to be used. If you choose auto,
the conversion engine will be automatically selected according to the current
locale.
.PP
Note this feature needs uim library.
.PP
.B m17n library:
.TP
Option
Specify the language and the input method to be used. If you choose auto, the
language and input method will be automatically selected according to the
current locale.
.PP
Note this feature needs m17n library and m17n-db.
.PP
.B SCIM:
.TP
No option
.PP
.B iBus:
.TP
No option
.PP
.B Fcitx:
.TP
No option
.PP
.B Freewnn:
.TP
Option
Specify the address of the host where jserver works.
.PP
.B Canna:
.TP
No option
.PP
.B SKK:
.TP
Option
Specify the place of skk dictionary (server or file) and the key used as sticky shift key.
.PP
.B IIIMF:
.TP
Option
Specify the language id (RFC1766) and the language engine to be used. If you
choose auto, the language id/engine will be automatically selected according
to the current locale.
.PP
Note this feature needs IIIMCF library.
.RE
.TP
Complex Text Layout
Whether to enable complex text layouting on UTF8 encoding to support indic scripts and
RTL (right-to-left) languages such as Arabic and Hebrew.  (\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-ctl\fR)
.TP
Combining
Whether to support combining characters by overstriking. (\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-comb\fR)
.TP
Combining = 1 (or 0) logical column(s)
Processing combining characters as if it occupies one column logically
while it occupies zero column on the screen.
(\fB\-J\fR, \fB\-\-dyncomb\fR)
.TP
Process received strings via Unicode
When you paste some strings into \fBmlterm\fR, the strings
are converted into Unicode and then to \fBmlterm\fR encoding.
(\fB\-U\fR, \fB\-\-viaucs\fR)
.TP
OpenType Layout
Whether to show substituting glyphs in open type fonts with the use of libotf or harfbuzz.
(\fB\-\-otl\fR)
.TP
Ambiguouswidth = fullwidth (UTF8 only)
Processing Unicode characters with EastAsianAmbiguous property as fullwidth.
(\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-ac\fR)
.TP
Fullwidth = 2 (or 1) logical column(s)
Processing CJK fullwidth characters as it occupies two columns logically
since it occupies two columns on the screen.
(\fB\-Z\fR, \fB\-\-multicol\fR)
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Font page
Configurations related to appearance (or look&feel) are located
in this page.
.TP
Font size
Font size in pixel. (\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-fontsize\fR)
.TP
Foreground color
Foreground color for letters. (\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-fg\fR)
.TP
Xft
Use xft for rendering engine. (\fB\-*\fR, \fB\-\-type\fR)
.TP
Cairo
Use cairo for rendering engine. (\fB\-*\fR, \fB\-\-type\fR)
.TP
Anti alias
Use anti-alias fonts by using Xft or cairo. (\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-aa\fR)
.TP
Variable column width
Use variable column width. (\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-varwidth\fR)
.TP
Vertical mode
Vertical writing mode. (\fB\-G\fR, \fB\-\-vertical\fR)
.TP
Font name
Specify XLFD, Xft or cairo font for character sets.
"Select" button shows a dialog to choose it.
.TP
Font policy
Whether to use unicode fonts (or non-unicode fonts) all the time
regardless of a selected encoding. (\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-onlyucsfont\fR)
(\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-noucsfont\fR)
.TP
Unicode areas you won't convert to other charsets
Specify code point areas which are shown by unicode fonts regardless of -n option.
(\fB\-\-ucsnoconv\fR)
.TP
Box drawing
Whether to use a unicode font or (a dec special font) all the time
to draw box drawing characters. (\fB\-\-boxdraw\fR)
.TP
Line space
Specify number of extra dots between lines. (\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-lsp\fR)
.TP
Letter space
Specify number of extra dots between characters. (\fB\-\-csp\fR)
.TP
Underline position
Specify the position (offset from the baseline) of underline. (\fB\-\-ulpos\fR)
.TP
Baseline position
Specify the position (offset from the default baseline) of baseline. (\fB\-\-blpos\fR)
.TP
Screen size ratio against font size
Specify actual screen width (screen height in vertical mode). (\fB\-1\fR, \fB\-\-wscr\fR)
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Background page
Configurations related to background are located in this page.
.TP
Background color
Background color. (\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bg\fR)
.TP
Picture
Specify the image file to be used for background image.
(\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-pic\fR)
.TP
Pseudo Transparent
Pseudo transparent background. (\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transbg\fR)
.TP
Picture/Transparent Brightness, Contrast, Gamma and Alpha.
Brightness, contrast, gamma alpha of the background image.
(\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-bright\fR)
(\fB\-3\fR, \fB\-\-contrast\fR)
(\fB\-4\fR, \fB\-\-gamma\fR)
(\fB\-X\fR, \fB\-\-alpha\fR)
.TP
Fade ratio on unfocus
Fading ratio when window is unfocused. (\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-fade\fR)
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Color page
Configurations related to color are located in this page.
.TP
Cursor color
Specify color to show cursor. (\fB\-9\fR, \fB\-\-crfg\fR)
(\fB\-0\fR, \fB\-\-crbg\fR)
.TP
Substituting color
Specify color to show instead of bold, underlined, italic, blinking
or crossed-out attribute.
(\fB\-\-bd\fR)
(\fB\-\-ul\fR)
(\fB\-\-it\fR)
(\fB\-\-bl\fR)
(\fB\-\-co\fR)
.TP
VT basic 16 colors
Customize VT basic 16 text colors.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Scrollbar page
Configurations related to scrollbar are located in this page.
.TP
Position
Specify scrollbar position. (\fB\-O\fR, \fB\-\-sbmod\fR)
.TP
View
Specify name of scrollbar. (\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-sbview\fR)
.TP
Foreground color
Specify foreground color of scrollbar. (\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-sbfg\fR)
.TP
Background color
Specify background color of scrollbar. (\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-sbbg\fR)
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Others page
Other configurations are located in this page.
.TP
Tab size
Column number of tab. (\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-tw\fR)
.TP
Backlog size
Number of lines of backlog. (\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-sl\fR)
.TP
Columns/Rows
Number of columns and rows of the screen. (\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-geometry\fR)
.TP
Word separators
Delimiter characters used for word selection, which are consulted when
you double-clicked mlterm, to define what is a word.
(\fB\-W\fR, \fB\-\-sep\fR)
.TP
Double click interval (msec)
Doubleclick/tripleclick interval in millisecond.
(\fB\-$\fR, \fB\-\-mc\fR)
.TP
Meta key outputs
Behavior of META key. (\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-meta\fR)
.TP
Bell mode
Behavior when \fBmlterm\fR receives BEL (0x07) code.
(\fB\-7\fR, \fB\-\-bel\fR)
.TP
Save log
Whether to log sequence received from pty in ~/.mlterm/[pty].log
in raw or ttyrec format.
(\fB\-\-logseq\fR) (\fB\-\-seqfmt\fR)
.TP
CLIPBOARD Selection
Whether to enable CLIPBOARD (not only PRIMARY) selection. (\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-clip\fR)
.TP
Local echo
Whether to use local echo mode. (\fB\-\-loecho\fR)
.TP
Blink cursor
Whether to blink cursor. (\fB\-\-blink\fR)
.TP
Don't scroll automatically in scrolling back.
Don't exit backscroll mode when console applications output something. (\fB\-6\fR, \fB\-\-stbs\fR)
.TP
Scroll by Shift+Up or Shift+Down
Enable extended keys for backscroll mode. (\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-extkey\fR)
.TP
Select URI by double click
Select URI by double clicking it regardless of \fB\-W\fR option. (\fB\-\-uriword\fR)
.TP
Send keys to all windows
Whether to broadcast input or pasted characters to all ptys whose value of
"ignore_broadcasted_chars" option is false. (\fB\-\-bc\fR)
.TP
Trim trailing CR/LF in pasting
Whether to trim new line characters at the end in pasting text. (\fB\-\-trim\fR)
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Buttons
There are buttons which is independent from OK/Apply/Cancel buttons.
.TP
OK/Apply/Cancel
OK button applies the modified configuration to the current mlterm
session, saves it to "\fB~/.mlterm/main\fR" configuration file,
and quits the GUI Configurator.
Apply button just applies the modified configuration to the current
\fBmlterm\fR session.
.TP
Font size (Larger and Smaller)
Change font size.
.TP
Full reset
Reset internal status.
.TP
Snapshot
Snapshot the screen and save it to ~/.mlterm/*.snp.
.TP
SSH SCP
Transfer a file via SCP.
.TP
PTY List
One process of \fBmlterm\fR may have multiple sessions and screens.
The sessions may or may not have corresponding screen, i.e.,
the number of sessions can be more than the number of screens.
Such situation can be achieved by closing a part of multiple screens
from \fB\-@\fR/\fB\-\-screens\fR option.
In such case, the screen-less session can be designated to one of
screens by choosing the session (pty) from this list and push "select"
button.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH CONFIGURABLE MENU
Pushing control key and mouse button 1 invokes configurable menu
displayer (\fBmlterm-menu\fR).  It displays a menu with items such
as "Larger Font" or "UTF-8 encoding".  Though a default menu definition
is supplied, you can freely define menu items by writing a menu
configuration file.  See \fBMenu Configuration File\fR section
for detail.
.PP
Note this feature needs GTK+ 2.x or later.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH MULTIPLE XIM
\fBmlterm\fR can use multiple XIM (X Input Method) servers.  The current
XIM is specified by the GUI configurator.  Using this feature you
can input multiple complex languages such as Japanese and Korean.
Locale to be used for communication with XIM can also be specified
for each XIM.  In the GUI configurator, you can choose one of
registered pair of XIM and its locale or you can input your favorite
XIM and its locale.
.PP
The locale for XIM is only used for communication with the XIM and
is not related to the current \fBmlterm\fR locale.  You have to
properly configure the XIM locale only when your XIM has preference
on the locale of XIM client (i.e., \fBmlterm\fR in this case).
\fBmlterm\fR automatically convert the inputed string into proper
encoding and you don't have to care about it.
.PP
Of course the initial XIM is chosen by using standard configuration,
i.e., using \fBXMODIFIERS\fR environmental variable.  See \fBX\fR(7)
for detail on XIM and \fBXMODIFIERS\fR variable.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH DAEMON MODE
When invoked with \fB\-j\fR/\fB\-\-daemon\fR command line option,
mlterm starts to listen on a unix domain socket
and accept requests from mlclient.

With \fBblend\fR  mlterm will exit when the final terminal window is closed.
But with  \fBgenuine\fR, mlterm will disconnect from X server windows and continues to
work. In latter case, it's possible to stop and restart a X server and revive the lasting sessions on mlterm.

.\" ********************************************************************
.SH SCROLLBAR
\fBmlterm\fR supports scrollbar API so that users can develop
scrollbar libraries with arbitrary look and feel.
The scrollbar libraries can be used by putting the libraries at
the specified directory (determined on the compilation process)
and invoke \fBmlterm\fR with \fB\-s \-S \fIname\fR option.
Scrollbar libraries named "\fBsample\fR", "\fBsample2\fR",
"\fBathena\fR", "\fBmotif\fR", "\fBmozmodern\fR", and "\fBnext\fR"
are supplied.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH ANTI\-ALIAS
\fBmlterm\fR can use True Type fonts using \-A option via FreeType
library when it has been compiled with anti\-alias option.
.PP
Note this feature needs XFree86 4.0.2 or above and FreeType 2.0.2
or above.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH WALLPAPER
\fBmlterm\fR can use background image (as known as wallpaper),
by using \fB\-p\fR/\fB\-\-pic\fR option.
You can also specify the brightness of the image by using
\fB\-H\fR/\fB\-\-bright\fR option.
.PP
Note this feature needs gdk-pixbuf.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH MULTIPLE PTY
This is one of most unique features of \fBmlterm\fR.
The number of windows can be specified using \-P option.
Typing control + F1 opens another window which shares the same process.
The maximum number of windows can be specified using \-\-maxptys option.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH BACKSCROLL MODE
\fBmlterm\fR enters into backscroll mode by typing
Shift + up or Shift + PageUp key.  In the mode,
you can use the following keys.
.TP
\fBj\fR or \fBDown\fR
Scroll down one line.
.TP
\fBk\fR or \fBUp\fR
Scroll up one line.
.TP
\fBd\fR or \fBPageDown\fR
Scroll down one page.
.TP
\fBu\fR or \fBPageUp\fR
Scroll up one page.
.TP
\fBShift\fR + \fBspace\fR
Initialize XIM.
.TP
\fBShift\fR + \fBInsert\fR
Insert selection.
.TP
\fBControl\fR + \fBF1\fR
Open a new pty window.
.TP
keys defined in \fBkey\fR configuration file
\fBPAGE_UP\fR, \fBPAGE_DOWN\fR, \fBSCROLL_UP\fR,
and \fBSCROLL_DOWN\fR keys are defined in the file.
.TP
other keys
Exit from the backscroll mode.
.PP
Please note that keys other than \fBPAGE_UP\fR and \fBPAGE_DOWN\fR
in \fBkey\fR configuration file are available only when you
used \fB\-q\fR/\fB\-\-extkey\fR command option.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH SELECTION
Selection is a mechanism to be used for copy-and-paste in X Window System.
Thus, this section describes on so-called copy-and-paste.
.PP
There are many encodings in the world.  Though copy-and-paste needs
sender and receiver and each of them can use one of various encodings,
\fBmlterm\fR is designed to be able to receive characters from various
encodings as much as possible.
.PP
There are two internationalized types of selection.  One is
\fBCOMPOUND_TEXT\fR is the another is \fBUTF8_STRING\fR.
COMPOUND_TEXT is ISO2022-based and can distinguish character sets
which a character belongs to.  However, the character sets which
COMPOUND_TEXT supports are limited to ISO8859-* and East Asian
character sets.  On the other hand, UTF8_STRING is Unicode-based
and can express all characters from Unicode character set.  However,
it cannot distinguish characters from different character sets which
share one codepoint in Unicode, which can be a problem especially
for CJK Han Ideogram (in other words, Kanji, Hanji, or Hanja).
Note that UTF8_STRING is rather new and can be used only with XFree86.
.PP
Though the receiver of copy-and-paste can request the preferable
type of selection, the sender may not support the requested type.
Thus \fBmlterm\fR has to be able to process both of COMPOUND_TEXT
and UTF8_STRING.
.PP
On the other hand, encodings supported by \fBmlterm\fR (see
\fBDESCRIPTION\fR section for detail) are classified into four
categories;
.TP
(a) Unicode itself
UTF-8.
.TP
(b) subset of Unicode and ISO-2022-compliant
"Subset of Unicode" means that Unicode supports round-trip compatibility
for the encoding, i.e., the conversion of the encoding \-\-> Unicode
\-\-> the encoding doesn't lose any information.
"ISO-2022-compliant" means that the encoding can be regarded as a
subset of ISO-2022 where a part of ISO-2022 control codes and escape
sequences are not supported.  Many popular encodings belong to this
category such as ISO-8859-*, EUC-*, ISO-2022-KR, TIS-620, TCVN5712, and
so on.
.TP
(c) subset of Unicode and non-ISO-2022-compliant
Some of popular encodings such as Shift_JIS, Big5, GBK, GB18030,
Johab, and so on belongs to this category.
.TP
(d) not subset of Unicode
ISO-2022-JP, ISO-2022-JP-2, ISO-2022-JP-3, EUC-TW, and so on.
All of them are ISO-2022-compliant.
.PP
Now the behavior of \fBmlterm\fR can be explained.
.PP
.nf
-------------------------------------------------------
encoding received selection  how to process?
-------------------------------------------------------
   a     COMPOUND_TEXT       convert to Unicode
   a     UTF8_STRING         no need for conversion
   b     COMPOUND_TEXT       user preference *1
   b     UTF8_STRING         convert to the encoding *2
   c     COMPOUND_TEXT       user preference *1
   c     UTF8_STRING         convert to the encoding *2
   d     COMPOUND_TEXT       no need for conversion *3
   d     UTF8_STRING         convert to the encoding *2
-------------------------------------------------------
.fi
.PP
*1 Characters from unsupported character sets (i.e., characters
which cannot be expressed in the \fBmlterm\fR encoding) may appear
in the selection (received copy-and-paste string).
If you want to receive characters which are equivalent to
characters which are supported in the current \fBmlterm\fR encoding
(i.e., characters which share the same codepoint in Unicode),
you can use \fB\-U\fR (or \fB\-\-viaucs\fR) option.  Otherwise,
these characters are pasted into \fBmlterm\fR using ISO-2022
escape sequence (when \fBmlterm\fR encoding is category b).
Note such ISO-2022 escape sequences are illegal in the current
\fBmlterm\fR encoding and the application software will need
special feature to treat them properly, though it is displayed
well in \fBmlterm\fR.  When \fBmlterm\fR encoding is category c,
such characters are simply ignored (when \fB\-U\fR option is
not enabled).
.PP
*2 Characters which cannot be converted into \fBmlterm\fR encoding
are simply ignored.
.PP
*3 Characters from unsupported character sets will be pasted
into \fBmlterm\fR using ISO-2022 escape sequence.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH CONFIGURATION
\fBmlterm\fR loads configuration files of "\fBmain\fR", "\fBfont\fR",
"\fBvfont\fR", "\fBtfont\fR", "\fBaafont\fR", "\fBvaafont\fR", "\fBtaafont\fR",
"\fBcolor\fR", "\fBkey\fR", "\fBtermcap\fR", and "\fBxim\fR" on start up.
"\fBmenu\fR" configuration file is loaded by the configurable menu
displayer (\fBmlterm-menu\fR).  See the section of \fBCONFIGURABLE
MENU\fR for detail.
.PP
Configuration files for one user are to be located in
"\fB~/.mlterm/\fR" directory, while location for configuration
files for all users depends on the compilation option.
Possible locations are "\fB/etc/\fR", "\fB/etc/X11/\fR",
"\fB/usr/X11R6/lib/X11/mlterm/\fR", and so on.
.PP
The names and the roles of configuration files are:
.TP
\fBmain\fR
Main configuration items which can be overridden by command line options.
.TP
\fBfont\fR
Configurations for ordinary X fonts.
.TP
\fBvfont\fR
Configurations for ordinary X fonts of variable column width.
.TP
\fBtfont\fR
Configurations for ordinary X fonts of vertical writing.
.TP
\fBaafont\fR
Configurations for Xft or cairo fonts.
.TP
\fBvaafont\fR
Configurations for Xft or cairo fonts of variable column width.
.TP
\fBtaafont\fR
Configurations for Xft or cairo fonts of vertical writing.
.TP
\fBcolor\fR
Designate concrete RGB values for color names.
.TP
\fBkey\fR
Key definitions for special features of \fBmlterm\fR.
.TP
\fBtermcap\fR
Define \fBmlterm\fR's behaviors which affects terminfo and
termcap definition.
.TP
\fBxim\fR
Define preset locales for X Input Methods which are shown
in the GUI configurator.  Of course you can input XIM names
and locales for the GUI configurator which are not listed
in this configuration file.
.TP
\fBmenu\fR
Define menu items which is displayed by configurable menu
displayer.
.PP
The contents of these configuration files (other than \fBmenu\fR)
consist of lines
of "\fIkey\fR=\fIvalue\fR" format.  Lines beginning with "\fB#\fR"
are ignored.
.PP
Note that the configuration files are changed since
version 1.9.44.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Main Configuration File
This file contains main configuration items which can be
overridden by command line options.
The main configuration file "\fBmain\fR" has the following keys.
Parentheses show the corresponding command-line options.
See the explanation on these command-line options for detail.
.TP
\fBauto_detect_encodings=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-ade\fR)
Specify character encodings detected automatically.
.TP
\fBallow_osc52=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-osc52\fR)
Allow access to clipboard(selection) by OSC 52 sequence.
.TP
\fBallow_scp=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-scp\fR)
Allow OSC 5379 scp.
.TP
\fBallow_change_shortcut=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-shortcut\fR)
Allow dynamic change of shortcut keys by OSC 5379 set_shortcut sequence.
.TP
\fBalpha=\fIname\fR (\fB\-X\fR, \fB\-\-alpha\fR)
Alpha in pseudo or true transparent.
.TP
\fBapp_name=\fIname\fR (\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-name\fR)
Application name.
\fBauto_restart=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-restart\fR)
Restart mlterm with all opened ptys except ssh if SIGSEGV, SIGBUS, SIGFPE or
SIGILL is received.
If you want to get core image, specify "false".
.TP
\fBbaseline_offset=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-blpos\fR)
Specify the position of baseline.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fBbel_mode=\fImode\fR (\fB\-7\fR, \fB\-\-bel\fR)
Behavior when BEL (0x07) is received.
.TP
\fBbd_color=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-bd\fR)
Specify the color to use to display bold characters.
.TP
\fBbl_color=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-bl\fR)
Specify the color to use to display blinking characters.
.TP
\fBbg_color=\fIcolor\fR (\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bg\fR)
Background color.
.TP
\fBbidi_mode=\fImode\fR (\fB\-\-bimode\fR)
Specify bidi mode.
.TP
\fBbidi_separators=\fIcharacterlist\fR (\fB\-\-bisep\fR)
Specify separator characters (\\xNN is also available) to render bidi text.
.TP
\fBbig5_buggy=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-5\fR, \fB\-\-big5bug\fR)
Support Big5 CTEXT bugs (which exist in XFree86 4.1.0 or before).
.TP
\fBblink_cursor=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-blink\fR)
Blink cursor.
.TP
\fBbox_drawing_font=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-boxdraw\fR)
Use either unicode font or DEC Special font forcibly to draw box-drawing characters.
.TP
\fBborderless=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-&\fR, \fB\-\-borderless\fR)
Don't draw window decorations.
.TP
\fBbrightness=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-brightness\fR)
Specify the amount of darkening or lightening the background image.
.TP
\fBbroadcast=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-bc\fR)
Whether to broadcast input or pasted characters to all ptys whose value of
"ignore_broadcasted_chars" option is false.
.TP
\fBcipher_list\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-ciphlist\fR)
Specify ciphers (comma separated list) for encrypting the ssh session.
.TP
\fBco_color=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-co\fR)
Specify the color to use to display crossed-out characters.
.TP
\fBcol_size_of_width_a=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-ac\fR)
Number of columns of Unicode characters with EastAsianAmbiguous property.
.TP
\fBcompose_dec_special_font=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-Y\fR, \fB\-\-decsp\fR)
Compose line drawing character set.
.TP
\fBconsole_encoding=\fIencoding\fR (\fB\-\-ckm\fR) (Available for mlterm-con)
Specify encoding of the console where mlterm-con works.
.TP
\fBconsole_sixel_colors=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-csc\fR) (Available for mlterm-con)
Specify the number of sixel graphics colors of the console where mlterm-con works.
.TP
\fBcontrast=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-3\fR, \fB\-\-contrast\fR)
Contrast of background image in percent.
.TP
\fBcursor_bg_color=\fIcolor\fR (\fB\-0\fR, \fB\-\-crbg\fR)
Specify background color for cursor.
.TP
\fBcursor_fg_color=\fIcolor\fR (\fB\-9\fR, \fB\-\-crfg\fR)
Specify foreground color for cursor.
.TP
\fBdaemon_mode=\fImode\fR (\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR)
Start as a daemon process.
.TP
\fBdefault_cell_size=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-csz\fR) (Available for mlterm-con)
Specify cell width and height in pixel which mlterm-con uses if it doesn't get them.
.TP
\fBdefault_server=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-serv\fR)
Specify a host you want to connect via ssh etc.
.TP
\fBdepth\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-depth\fR)
Specify visual depth.
.TP
\fBdisplay=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-display\fR)
Specify X server to connect.
.TP
\fBemoji_path=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-emoji\fR)
Specify path of a directory where emoji image files exist or a open type emoji
font to show unicode emoji characters.
.TP
\fBencoding=\fIencoding\fR (\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-\-km\fR)
Specify encoding.
.TP
\fBexit_backscroll_by_pty=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-exitbs\fR)
Exit backscroll mode on receiving data from pty.
.TP
\fBfade_ratio=\fIratio\fR (\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-fade_ratio\fR)
Specify fading ratio when window is unfocused.
.TP
\fBfb_resolution=\fIratio\fR (Available for mlterm-fb on NetBSD/x68k or OpenBSD)
Specify the screen resolution and depth. (e.g. 768x512x4)
.TP
\fBfg_color=\fIcolor\fR (\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-fg\fR)
Foreground color.
.TP
\fBfontsize=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-fontsize\fR)
Font size in pixel.
.TP
\fBfont_size_range=\fIrange\fR (\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-fsrange\fR)
Range of size of usable fonts.
.TP
\fBgamma=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-4\fR, \fB\-\-gamma\fR)
Gamma of background image in percent.
.TP
\fBgeometry=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-geometry\fR)
Specify size and position of the window; see \fBX\fR(7).
.TP
\fBhide_underline=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-noul\fR)
Don't draw underline.
.TP
\fBicon_name=\fIname\fR (\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-icon\fR)
Icon name.
.TP
\fBicon_path=\fIpath\fR
Path for the image file to be used as window icon.
.TP
\fBignore_broadcasted_chars=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-ibc\fR)
Whether to ignore broadcasted characters.
.TP
\fBinner_border=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-border\fR)
Specify inner border width.
.TP
\fBinput_method\fR= \fIinput method\fR : \fB[\fR\fI arguments\fR \fB... ]\fR (\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-im\fR)
Specify input method.
.TP
\fBiso88591_font_for_usascii=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-8\fR, \fB\-\-88591\fR)
Use ISO8859-1 fonts for US-ASCII part of various encodings.
.TP
\fBit_color=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-it\fR)
Specify the color to use to display italic characters.
.TP
\fBlayout_inner_border=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-lborder\fR)
Specify inner border width of a layout manager.
.TP
\fBleftward_double_drawing=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-ldd\fR)
Embold glyphs by drawing doubly at 1 pixel leftward instead of rightward.
.TP
\fBletter_space=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-csp\fR)
Specify number of extra dots between letters. (ignored if you specify \fB\-\-V\fR option.)
If you use multiple fonts whose widths are different, adjust this option.
.TP
\fBline_space=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-lsp\fR)
Specify number of extra dots between lines. (Negative value is available.)
If you use multiple fonts whose heights are different, adjust this option.
.TP
\fBlocale=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-locale\fR)
Specify locale.
.TP
\fBlogging_msg=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-logmsg\fR)
Enable logging messages of mlterm to ~/.mlterm/msg[pid].log.
.TP
\fBlogging_vt_seq=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-logseq\fR)
Enable logging vt100 sequences to ~/.mlterm/[device].log.
.TP
\fBlogsize=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-sl\fR)
Specify number of lines of backlog or "unlimited".
.TP
\fBmax_ptys=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-maxptys\fR)
Specify maximum number of ptys (sessions) to be opened simultaneously.
.TP
\fBmeta_prefix=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-metaprefix\fR)
Specify prefix characters in pressing meta key if mod_meta_mode = esc.
.TP
\fBmod_meta_mode=\fImode\fR (\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-meta\fR)
Behavior of META key.
.TP
\fBmod_meta_key=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-K\fR, \fB\-\-metakey\fR)
Specify a key to be regarded as META.
.TP
\fBnot_use_unicode_font=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-noucsfont\fR)
Use non-Unicode fonts even when \fBmlterm\fR encoding is UTF-8.
.TP
\fBonly_use_unicode_font=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-onlyucsfont\fR)
Use Unicode fonts even when \fBmlterm\fR encoding is not UTF-8.
.TP
\fBot_features=\fIvalue\fR (\-\-gft\fR)
Specify features of glyph substitution.
.TP
\fBot_features=\fIvalue\fR (\-\-gst\fR)
Specify script of glyph substitution.
.TP
\fBparent_window=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-parent\fR)
Specify parent Window ID.
.TP
\fBprimary_da=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-da1\fR)
Specify primary device attributes string.
.TP
\fBreceive_string_via_ucs=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-U\fR, \fB\-\-viaucs\fR)
If the received selection (i.e., copy-and-paste strings) or strings received
from XIM is not UTF8_STRING type, convert it into Unicode and then to the
current mlterm encoding, in order to identify equivalent characters
(i.e., characters which share the same codepoint in Unicode) from various
character sets.
See \fBSELECTION\fR section below for detail.
.TP
\fBregard_uri_as_word=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-uriword\fR)
Select URI by double clicking it regardless of \-\-W option.
.TP
\fBrv_color=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-rv\fR)
Specify the color to use to display reverse characters.
.TP
\fBsb_bg_color=\fIcolor\fR (\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-sbbg\fR)
Background color for scrollbar.
.TP
\fBsb_fg_color=\fIcolor\fR (\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-sbfg\fR)
Foreground color for scrollbar.
.TP
\fBscreen_width_ratio=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-1\fR, \fB\-\-wscr\fR)
Specify actual screen width (screen height in vertical mode).
.TP
\fBscrollbar_mode=\fImode\fR (\fB\-O\fR, \fB\-\-sbmod\fR)
Specify scrollbar position.
.TP
\fBscrollbar_view_name=\fIname\fR (\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-sbview\fR)
Specify name of scrollbar.
.TP
\fBsecondary_da=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-da2\fR)
Specify secondary device attributes string.
.TP
\fBseparate_wall_picture=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-multivram\fR) (Available for mlterm-fb on NetBSD/x68k)
Draw the wall picture on Text VRAM instead of Graphic VRAM to improve
the performance of scrolling.
\fBssh_auto_reconnect\fR=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-rcn\fR)
Reconnect to ssh server automatically in unexpected disconnection.
.TP
\fBssh_keepalive_interval\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-keepalive\fR)
Specify interval seconds to send keepalive message to ssh server.
.TP
\fBssh_public_key\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-pubkey\fR)
Specify public key file for ssh connection.
.TP
\fBssh_private_key\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-privkey\fR)
Specify private key file for ssh connection.
.TP
\fBssh_x11_forwarding\fR=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-x11\fR)
Enable x11 forwarding for ssh connection.
.TP
\fBstart_with_local_pty\fR (\fB\-\-slp\fR) (Available for Android)
Start mlterm with local pty instead of ssh connection.
.TP
\fBstep_in_changing_font_size\fR (\fB\-z\fR, \fB\-\-largesmall\fR)
Specify changing size when font size becomes larger or smaller.
.TP
\fBtabsize=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-tw\fR)
Specify tab width.
.TP
\fBtermtype=\fIstring\fR (\fB\-y\fR, \fB\-\-term\fR)
Terminal type.
.TP
\fBtitle=\fIname\fR (\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-title\fR)
Title name.
.TP
\fBtrim_trailing_newline_in_pasting=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-trim\fR)
Trim new line characters at the end in pasting text.
.TP
\fBtype_engine=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-*\fR, \fB\-\-type\fR)
Rendering engine for drawing fonts.
.TP
\fBul_color=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-ul\fR)
Specify the color to use to display underlined characters.
.TP
\fBunderline_offset=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-ulpos\fR)
Specify the position (offset from the baseline) of underline.
The default is \fB0\fR.
.TP
\fBunicode_full_width_areas\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-fullwidth\fR)
Force full width regardless of EastAsianWidth.txt.
.TP
\fBunicode_half_width_areas\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-halfwidth\fR)
Force half width regardless of EastAsianWidth.txt.
.TP
\fBunicode_noconv_areas\fR=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-ucsnoconv\fR)
Use unicode fonts partially regardless of -n option.
.TP
\fBuse_aafont=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-aafont\fR) (Available for mlterm-fb or mlterm-wl)
Use ~/.mlterm/*aafont configurations with the use of fontconfig.
.TP
\fBuse_auto_detect=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-auto\fR)
Automatically detect appropriate character encoding from the encodings
specified by auto_detect_encodings option.
.TP
\fBuse_alt_buffer=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-altbuf\fR)
Use alternate screen buffer.
.TP
\fBuse_ansi_colors=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-colors\fR)
Recognize ANSI color change escape sequences.
.TP
\fBuse_anti_alias=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-aa\fR)
Use anti alias font.
.TP
\fBuse_bold_font=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-bdfont\fR)
Use bold font for characters with the bold attribute.
.TP
\fBuse_clipboard=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-clip\fR)
Use CLIPBOARD (not only PRIMARY) selection.
.TP
\fBuse_combining=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-comb\fR)
Enable combining characters.
.TP
\fBuse_cp932_ucs_for_xft=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-cp932\fR)
Use CP932 - UCS mapping for displaying JISX0208 by Xft or cairo.
.TP
\fBuse_dynamic_comb=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-J\fR, \fB\-\-dyncomb\fR)
Enable dynamic character combining.
.TP
\fBuse_extended_scroll_shortcut=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-extkey\fR)
Enable extended short cut keys for scrolling.
.TP
\fBuse_ctl=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-ctl\fR)
Enable complex text layouting on UTF8 encoding.
.TP
\fBuse_ot_layout=\fIbool\fR (\-\-otl\fR)
Whether to show substituting glyphs in open type fonts with the use of libotf or harfbuzz.
.TP
\fBuse_italic_font=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-itfont\fR)
Use italic font for characters with the italic attribute.
.TP
\fBuse_local_echo=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-loecho\fR)
Use local echo mode.
.TP
\fBuse_login_shell=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-ls\fR)
Whether to use login shell or not.
.TP
\fBuse_multi_column_char=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-Z\fR, \fB\-\-multicol\fR)
Process full width characters.
.TP
\fBuse_point_size=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-point\fR)
Treat the value of \-w option as point instead of pixel.
.TP
\fBuse_mdi=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-mdi\fR)
Use multiple document interface.
.TP
\fBuse_transbg=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transbg\fR)
Use pseudo transparent background.
.TP
\fBuse_urgent_bell=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-\-urgent\fR)
Draw the user's attention when making a bell sound in the unfocused window.
.TP
\fBuse_variable_column_width=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-varwidth\fR)
Use variable column width.
.TP
\fBuse_vertical_cursor=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-Q\fR, \fB\-\-vcur\fR)
Use cursor movement for vertical writing.
.TP
\fBuse_xim=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-xim\fR)
Use XIM (X Input Method).
.TP
\fBvt_color_mode=\fImode\fR (\fB\-\-vtcolor\fR)
Set vt color mode.
.TP
\fBvertical_mode=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-G\fR, \fB\-\-vertical\fR)
Use vertical writing.
.TP
\fBwall_picture=\fIpath\fR (\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-pic\fR)
Path for wallpaper image.
.TP
\fBword_separators=\fIcharacterlist\fR (\fB\-W\fR, \fB\-\-sep\fR)
Delimiter characters (\\xNN is also available) used for word selection.
.TP
\fBworking_directory=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-working\-directory\fR)
Working directory.
.TP
\fBstatic_backscroll_mode=\fIbool\fR (\fB\-6\fR, \fB\-\-stbs\fR)
Don't exit backscroll mode when console applications output something.
.TP
\fBvt_seq_format=\fIvalue\fR (\fB\-\-seqfmt\fR)
Specify the format of logging vt100 sequence.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Font Configuration Files
The font configuration files "\fBfont\fR", "\fBvfont\fR", "\fBtfont\fR",
"\fBaafont\fR", "\fBvaafont\fR", and "\fBtaafont\fR" have the following keys.
.PP
.nf
\fBDEFAULT=\fIfont\fR
\fBDEC_SPECIAL=\fIfont\fR
\fBISO8859_\fIn\fB=\fIfont\fR
\fBTIS620=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_HINDI=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_MALAYALAM=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_ASSAMESE=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_BENGALI=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_GUJARATI=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_KANNADA=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_MALAYALAM=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_ORIYA=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_PUNJABI=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_TAMIL=\fIfont\fR
\fBISCII_TELUGU=\fIfont\fR
\fBVISCII=\fIfont\fR
\fBKOI8_R=\fIfont\fR
\fBKOI8_U=\fIfont\fR
\fBTCVN5712=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0201_ROMAN=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0201_KATA=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0208_1978=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0208_1983=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0208_1990=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0213_2000_1=\fIfont\fR
\fBJISX0213_2000_2=\fIfont\fR
\fBKSX1001_1997=\fIfont\fR
\fBUHC=\fIfont\fR (not used)
\fBJOHAB=\fIfont\fR (not used)
\fBGB2312_80=\fIfont\fR
\fBGBK=\fIfont\fR
\fBBIG5=\fIfont\fR
\fBHKSCS=\fIfont\fR
\fBCNS11643_1992_\fIn\fB=\fIfont\fR
\fBISO10646_UCS4_1=\fIfont\fR
\fBISO10646_UCS4_1_FULLWIDTH=\fIfont\fR
\fBU+XXXX-XXXX=\fIfont\fR
.fi
.RS
Specify fonts for corresponding character sets.  The format is
different between "\fBfont\fR", "\fBvfont\fR" "\fBtfont\fR" files and
"\fBaafont\fR", "\fBvaafont\fR" "\fBtaafont\fR" files.
.PP
In "\fBfont\fR", "\fBvfont\fR", "\fBtfont\fR" files, "\fIfont\fR" is specified in
"\fINAME\fR:\fIPERCENT\fR"
format where "\fISIZE\fR" is font size in pixel,
and "\fINAME\fR" is XLFD or alias names of X fonts.
If "\fINAME\fR" contains "%d", it is replaced by an appropriate font size number.
":\fIPERCENT\fR" is multiplied by font size and decides character width of a font.
If ":\fIPERCENT\fR" is omitted, max font width is used for it.
.PP
In "\fBaafont\fR", "\fBvaafont\fR", "\fBtaafont\fR" files, "\fIfont\fR" is specified in
"\fIFAMILY WEIGHT SLANT SIZE\fR:\fIPERCENT\fR"
format.
":\fIPERCENT\fR" is multiplied by font size and decides character width of a font.
If ":\fIPERCENT\fR" is omitted, 'M' width is used for it.
.PP
\fBmlfc\fR command generates ~/.mlterm/aafont automatically.
.PP
.RE
.TP
\fIcharset\fB_BOLD=\fIfont\fR
Specify boldface fonts.
.TP
\fIcharset\fB_ITALIC=\fIfont\fR
Specify italic fonts.
.TP
\fIcharset\fB_BOLD_ITALIC=\fIfont\fR
Specify bold-italic fonts.
.TP
\fIU+XXXX-XXXX=\fIfont\fR
Specify which fonts to use for unicode ranges except U+00-7f.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Color Configuration File
The color configuration file "\fBcolor\fR" has the following key.
.TP
\fICOLORNAME\fR=\fIRGB\fR
Assign a concrete color for the name \fICOLORNAME\fR.
Default colors used by mlterm are
\fBblack\fR,
\fBred\fR,
\fBgreen\fR,
\fByellow\fR,
\fBblue\fR,
\fBmagenta\fR,
\fBcyan\fR, and
\fBwhite\fR.  and can be overridden here.

For highlighted colors, a name with "hl_" prefix will be automatically searched.
i.e. for bold read character, "hl_red" is searched instead of "red".

\fB17\fR - \fB230\fR and \fB232\fR - \fB255\fR in 256 colors can be also overridden.

The format of \fIRGB\fR is either "\fIRRRR\fB\-\fIGGGG\fB\-\fIBBBB\fR"
(where
\fIRRRR\fR,
\fIGGGG\fR, and
\fIBBBB\fR are hexadecimal value from 0 to ffff),
"\fB#\fIRRGGBB\fR", "\fB#\fIRRGGBBAA\fR", "\fIrgb:RR/GG/BB\fR"
or "\fIrgba:RR/GG/BB/AA\fR"(where
\fIRR\fR,
\fIGG\fR, and
\fIBB\fR are hexadecimal value from 00 to ff).

If mlterm failed to parse a entry, the color will be regarded as black.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS XIM Configuration File
The X Input Methods configuration file "\fBxim\fR" has the following
format
.PP
\fIXIM\fR=\fIlocale\fR
.PP
where \fIXIM\fR is XIM name and \fIlocale\fR is locale name used
for communication with the XIM server.  For example,
.nf
kinput2=ja_JP.eucJP
Ami=ko_KR.eucKR
xcin-zh_CN.GB2312=zh_CN.GB2312
.fi
These settings are used to create list of XIMs by the GUI configurator.
Though a XIM which is not listed in this file can't be selected from the list,
it can be selected by specifying its name directly.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Feature Key Configuration File
The feature key configuration file "\fBkey\fR" has the following format.
.PP
\fIKEY\fR=\fIFEATURE\fR
.PP
Here, the format for \fIKEY\fR is "\fI(MASK\fB+\fI)KEY\fR",
where \fIMASK\fR is one of \fBControl\fR, \fBShift\fR, \fBMod1\fR, \fBMod2\fR,
\fBMod3\fR, \fBMod4\fR, \fBMod5\fR, \fBMod\fR and \fBAlt\fR.
You can specify multiple "\fIMASK\fB+\fR"s.
You can search spellings of \fIKEY\fR by using \fBxev\fR(1)
command or searching keysym macros from
\fB/usr/X11R6/include/X11/keysymdefs.h\fR (or the equivalent
file in your X11 include directory) and omit the prefix \fBXK_\fR.
Double quotation marks are not needed.
You can specify Button1, Button2, Button3, Button4 or Button5 as \fIKEY\fR.
.PP
\fIFEATURE\fR is one of \fBIM_HOTKEY\fR,
\fBEXT_KBD\fR,
\fBOPEN_SCREEN\fR,
\fBNEW_PTY\fR,
\fBOPEN_PTY\fR,
\fBNEXT_PTY\fR,
\fBPREV_PTY\fR,
\fBVSPLIT_SCREEN\fR,
\fBHSPLIT_SCREEN\fR,
\fBCLOSE_SCREEN\fR,
\fBNEXT_SCREEN\fR,
\fBPREV_SCREEN\fR,
\fBHEXPAND_SCREEN\fR,
\fBVEXPAND_SCREEN\fR,
\fBPAGE_UP\fR,
\fBPAGE_DOWN\fR,
\fBSCROLL_UP\fR,
\fBSCROLL_DOWN\fR,
\fBINSERT_SELECTION\fR,
\fB"\fISTRING\fB"\fR,
or \fB"proto:\fISTRING\fB"\fR.
.TP
\fBIM_HOTKEY\fR
Switch conversion mode of m17n library and kdb input methods. (default \fBUNUSED\fR)
.TP
\fBEXT_KBD\fR
Activate or deactivate kbd input method.
(This feature was obsoleted by IM_HOTKEY)
.TP
\fBOPEN_SCREEN\fR
Open new pty in new screen (default \fBCtrl+F1\fR).
.TP
\fBNEW_PTY\fR
Same as OPEN_SCREEN (obsoleted).
.TP
\fBOPEN_PTY\fR
Open new pty in current screen (default \fBCtrl+F2\fR).
.TP
\fBNEXT_PTY\fR
Switch to a next free pty (default \fBCtrl+F3\fR).
.TP
\fBPREV_PTY\fR
Switch to a previous free pty (default \fBCtrl+F4\fR).
.TP
\fBHSPLIT_SCREEN\fR
Open new pty in horizontally split screen (default \fBShift+F1\fR).
.TP
\fBVSPLIT_SCREEN\fR
Open new pty in vertically split screen (default \fBShift+F2\fR).
.TP
\fBNEXT_SCREEN\fR
Switch to a next unfocused screen (default \fBShift+F3\fR).
.TP
\fBPREV_SCREEN\fR
Switch to a previous unfocused screen (default \fBShift+F4\fR).
.TP
\fBCLOSE_SCREEN\fR
Close current screen (default \fBShift+F5\fR).
.TP
\fBHEXPAND_SCREEN\fR
Expand current screen horizontally (default \fBShift+F6\fR).
.TP
\fBVEXPAND_SCREEN\fR
Expand current screen vertically (default \fBShift+F7\fR).
.TP
\fBPAGE_UP\fR
Start backscroll mode and scroll up one page
(default \fBShift+Prior\fR).
.TP
\fBPAGE_DOWN\fR
Scroll down one page.
(default \fBShift+Next\fR).
.TP
\fBSCROLL_UP\fR
Start backscroll mode and scroll up by one line
(default \fBShift+Up\fR).  Note this key is enabled only when
\fB\-q\fR/\fB\-\-extkey\fR option is used.
.TP
\fBSCROLL_DOWN\fR
Scroll down one line
(default \fBShift+Down\fR).  Note this key is enabled only when
\fB\-q\fR/\fB\-\-extkey\fR option is used.
.TP
\fBINSERT_SELECTION\fR
Insert selection (default \fBShift+Insert\fR).
.TP
\fB"\fISTRING\fB"\fR
The specified string is issued when the \fIKEY\fR key is pressed.
Double quotation marks are required around the \fISTRING\fR.
Note that you cannot control the status of mlterm by
sending terminal control codes such as \fB"\\x1b]5379;encoding=utf8\\x0a"\fR
because the code sequence will be caught by your shell (or something running on it).
To deliver control sequences to mlterm directly, use \fB"proto:\fISTRING\fB"\fR
instead.
.TP
\fB"proto:\fISTRING\fB"\fR
The specified string is assumed to \fBmlterm\fR's original control
sequence. A list of sequences should be found in \fBdoc/en/PROTOCOL\fR.
For example, \fB"proto:encoding=utf8"\fR
means changing the current character encoding to UTF-8.
.TP
\fB"exesel:\fISTRING\fB"\fR
The specified string is assumed to a command to be executed with selected
strings as arguments.
For example, \fB"exesel:mlclient -e w3m"\fR means executing
"mlclient -e w3m [selected text]".
.TP
\fB"menu:\fISTRING\fB"\fR
The specified string is assumed to a configuration program to be executed.
For example, \fB"menu:mlterm-menu"\fR means executing mlterm-menu.
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Terminal Behavior Configuration File
This configuration file determines the behaviors of \fBmlterm\fR
that should match the definition of terminfo and termcap.  In principle,
this file should not be edited and, instead, you should choose a
proper value for \fBTERM\fR variable (i.e., proper terminfo/termcap
definition) which meets \fBmlterm\fR's behavior.
(Since \fBmlterm\fR' can behave as a xterm/kterm to some extent,
\fBTERM=kterm\fR / \fBTERM=xterm\fR should give acceptable results.)
However, sometimes you may not want to edit your terminfo and termcap.
Your software may don't understand terminfo nor termcap, or your
terminfo/termcap entry is shared by several terminal emulators
and changing it will break other terminals.
In such cases, you can configure \fBmlterm\fR
so that it works well on existing terminfo/termcap definitions
on your systems.  This is also useful for distributors of
operating systems (like Debian) with strict policy of terminal
emulators' behaviors.
.PP
You can define the behaviors of \fBmlterm\fR for each value
of \fBTERM\fR variable, so that you don't need to edit \fBtermcap\fR
file each time you login into other systems and use different
value of \fBTERM\fR variable by \fB\-y\fR option.  You can also specify
the default behavior when \fBTERM\fR variable is different from all
of specified TERM names in the \fBtermcap\fR file.
.PP
The grammar of this configuration file is resemble to the grammar
of termcap entries.  First, one or more name(s) of TERM is written.
Multiple names are connected with vertical line character '|'.
Special name '*' is for default.
Then colon ':' comes, and keys are written separated by colons.
Configuration(s) for other TERM will follow after new line.
.PP
Followings are available keys for each TERM value.
.TP
\fBkD=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when Delete key is pushed
(default \fB\\E[3~\fR).
.TP
\fBkb=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when BackSpace key is pushed
(default \fB^H\fR).
.TP
\fBkh=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when HOME key is pushed
in application cursor key mode.
(default \fB\\EOH\fR).
.TP
\fB@7=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when END key is pushed
in application cursor key mode.
(default \fB\\EOF\fR).
.TP
\fBk1=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when F1 key is pushed
(default \fB\\EOP\fR).
.TP
\fBk2=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when F2 key is pushed
(default \fB\\EOQ\fR).
.TP
\fBk3=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when F3 key is pushed
(default \fB\\EOR\fR).
.TP
\fBk4=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when F4 key is pushed
(default \fB\\EOS\fR).
.TP
\fBk5=\fIsequence\fR
Specify sequence to be outputted when F5 key is pushed
(default \fB\\E[15~\fR).
.TP
\fBut\fR
Specify the way how the screen is erased by control codes.
If \fBut\fR is written in the \fBtermcap\fR file, charcells
are painted by the current background color when erased;
otherwise the charcells are painted by the initial background
color.  Default is non-\fBut\fR behavior.
.PP
The following special characters can be used to specify \fIsequence\fR
in keys of \fBkD\fR/\fBkb\fR/\fBkh\fR/\fB@7\fR.
.TP
\fB\\E\fR
ESC code (0x1b).
.TP
\fB^?\fR
DEL code (0x7f).
.TP
\fB^A\fR, \fB^B\fR,...
Corresponding control code (0x01 \- 0x1a).
.\" ******************************************************
.SS Menu Configuration File
This configuration file defines the menu displayed by the
configurable menu displayer \fBmlterm-menu\fR.  See
\fBCONFIGURABLE MENU\fR section for detail.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH SEE ALSO
Manual pages of
\fBmlclient\fR(1),
\fBlocale\fR(7),
\fBcharsets\fR(7),
\fBUTF-8\fR(7), and
\fBX\fR(7).
.PP
\fBPROTOCOL\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/PROTOCOL)
for mlterm's original control escape sequences which enable you to change
configurations dynamically.

e.g.) echo -en "\\x1b]5379;encoding=eucjp\\x07"
.PP
\fBREADME.android\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.android)
for mlterm on Android.
.PP
\fBREADME.brltty\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.brltty)
for accessibility with the use of brlapi. (http://brl.thefreecat.org).
.PP
\fBREADME.cocoa\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.cocoa)
for mlterm on MacOSX/Cocoa.
.PP
\fBREADME.cocoatouch\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.cocoatouch)
for mlterm on iOS/Cocoa Touch.
.PP
\fBREADME.console\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.console)
for mlterm on Console.
.PP
\fBREADME.fb\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.fb)
for mlterm on framebuffer.
.PP
\fBREADME.indic\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.indic)
for indic scripts.
.PP
\fBREADME.sb\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.sb)
for development of scrollbar library.
.PP
\fBREADME.sdl2\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.sdl2)
for mlterm on SDL2.
.PP
\fBREADME.ssh\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.ssh)
for ssh connection with the use of libssh2 (http://www.libssh2.org).
.PP
\fBREADME.wayland\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.wayland)
for mlterm on Wayland.
.PP
\fBREADME.win32\fR (http://bitbucket.org/arakiken/mlterm/src/tip/doc/en/README.win32)
for mlterm on Win32 GDI.
.PP
Mapping tables between Unicode and local character sets
(and encodings) are found at Unicode Consortium web site
(http://www.unicode.org/Public/MAPPINGS/).  Note that
mapping tables for East Asian character sets and encodings
are moved to OBSOLETE/EASTASIA directory of the site
since August 2001.
.PP
For BIG5 and BIG5HKSCS encodings, mapping tables for Unicode
is taken from ftp://xcin.linux.org.tw/pub/xcin/i18n/charset/.
.PP
\fBUnicode Standard Annex (UAX) #11 East Asian Width\fR,
which explains East Asian Width properties, and
\fBEastAsianWidth.txt\fR, which defines EastAsianAmbiguous
characters in Unicode, are supplied by Unicode Consortium
(http://www.unicode.org).
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH FILES
.TP
"\fImain\fR", "\fIfont\fR", "\fIvfont\fR", "\fItfont\fR", "\fIaafont\fR", \
"\fIvaafont\fR", "\fItaafont\fR", "\fIcolor\fR", "\fIkey\fR", \
"\fItermcap\fR", "\fIxim\fR", and "\fImenu\fR"
Configuration files.
.\" ********************************************************************
.SH CONTACT
Subscribe mlterm-dev-en ML
(http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/mlterm-dev-en).

Attach ~/.mlterm/msg.log, backtrace log and related files to your report
if at all possible.

\"  LocalWords:  stbs backscroll bel crfg mc sbfg cjk mongol
